how it works, hoping that everything goes well.
One, two, three, four, five, six.
We're April the 2nd, up at Camp Creek, looking out
over the lake, chatting with Ed Cooper, and now
want to stop and be sure this machine is working.
Ed, would you, since we may not get your student
days done today, Hope we can. Would you give a brief
summary of your experience before you came to work
on the campus with Mr. Rutter and President
Williams? Concentrating on A&M experience, is
that what you mean? Yes. OK. My major in college was
the field of wildlife conservation.
I developed a great interest in that field as a
young man growing up in a natural situation in San
Marcos. Decided to major in wildlife and A&M was
the only and still is the only university in the
state that offers a degree program in wildlife
management. So with that in mind and not with any
idea at all about what employment I would get into
per se except that it would probably be with Parks
and Wildlife or Fish and Wildlife or Forest
Service or National Parks. I went into the field,
enjoyed it very, very much. I was a good student in
wildlife. And I made friends with Ari Callender,
who was the Ag Extension Service Wildlife
Specialist. He was the first one they had in all of
agriculture. And when I left to serve two years
with the 2nd Armored Division in Germany, Mr.
Callender wrote me. several times and said do not
accept a job anywhere until you've given us a
chance an extension because i'm going to retire so
honoring that i went to the campus had already had
an offer from parks and wildlife to be a public
information officer at rockport uh at a very low
salary by the way And I liked very much when I
interviewed Nolan Williamson and Hoot Gibson
with the Ag Extension. I was really impressed with
the people and their attitude about work. And I
said, you know, I believe I'll go to work with you
guys. They said, we want to start you as an
assistant county agent so you understand 4-H
programs and how the county extension people
operate in the counties. We'll put you with Elmo V.
Cook, one of our best county agents in Austin,
Texas. There'll be little towns and big towns, so
you get a cross-section of agriculture there
until Mr. Callender retires. He retired in six
months. So in about middle of 1956, I came to
campus, served seven years as ag extension
specialist in wildlife conservation, was in the
field about 50% of the time, and had more gates
opened and more doors open to meeting the good
people across the state of Texas than all of the
rest of my experiences put together because
that's the nature of that business. I still have
friends in counties across the state because of
extension work. So I guess my best experience was
the communications with people, primarily in
agriculture. I thoroughly enjoyed those seven
years as wildlife specialist. My territory was
simply the state of Texas. I wrote a newsletter to
all the county extension agents with as much
up-to-date information. I told them back in the
50s that we would see a time, for example, when the
leasing of property for hunting would be super big
business, and they guffawed and said, how in the
hell can it be when all they do is let their friends
and their family hunt? And now without hunting in
the hill country, for example, most ranchers
would be out of business. So what I predicted did
happen because I knew of people's intense desire
to be outdoors and away from the stress of life. So
with that background, I decided to get rich and
joined a classmate in Jacksonville, Texas, in
agricultural fertilizer and limestone
business. We had the trucks to spread them. We were
going to get rich. My arrival in Jacksonville
coincided with the worst drought they've ever had
there, and people simply stopped spending money
on something that would burn the pastures even
worse than the sun. And so I could see the
handwriting on the wall. Got a call in from Clark
Monroe, personnel director. And John Hutchison,
ag extension director, had given my name as a
candidate possibly for assistant to President
Earl Rutter. And he arranged an interview. I
walked into Mr. Rutter's office. And he said,
Cooper, I understand you sell ag limestone. He
said, I've got a ranch out close to London, Texas.
You know where that is? I said, I sure do. He said,
how much lime should I use on that ranch? And I said,
well, President Rutter, since it's entirely made
of limestone already, I really don't see you
wasting money on that. And he just died laughing.
And I think that simple little off to a good start
thing convinced him that I might be a type of
personality that he could use in that office. And
so in 63, October of 63, I started as his
administrative assistant. replacing Dorsey
Macquarie, who went over and, as you know,
developed the development office. And it had tied
in with student financial aid as well with Bob
Logan. I'm not going to ask this question of any
other. What was the beginning salary as Mr.
Rutter's assistant? The Extension Service had a
PhD in soil science at that time, just as I left,
which was only nine months before this. And he
passed the benchmark of $10,000 in salary for the
first extension specialist that had ever made
$10,000. And so I was flattered to come back at that
salary, $10,000. And at that time, we were in a
pretty bad situation because the job in
Jacksonville just did not pan out. So it was a
lifesaver for us.
Mr. Rutter, I learned, was really close with state
money. And if he thought he could get a guy 10, and
instead of 12 or 13, he'd damn sure go for 10. He was
very close. And then later I worked with Jack
Williams, which we'll get to, but he was the other
way. If he had a person he wanted, he'd pay whatever
it took. Rudder would do his best to get it at rock
bottom. And I think that's one reason you saw a lot
of retired military people on campus, because
they already had an income, and he could get them
for bargain rates. I can't fuss about it, but he was
damn tight. Describe Earl Rudder as you came to
know him at those first years. What was he like,
physically, emotionally, attitudinally, and so
forth?
He was a laid-back kind of an individual around the
office. He was fairly moody. And when I was his
assistant, it was my habit to go in in the morning
and I would have two Manila folders. And I'd call
them the happy file and the sad file. And if I could
see that far away look in his gray, steel gray eyes
that something was really nagging at him, I would
never get into that sad file. Because whatever I
proposed would be thumbs down. So I'd go to the
happy file and talk about easy things that we were
going to do that wouldn't require any thought. But
I could read him pretty well. He had a look about his
face. He was always signing papers, and very often
while I'd visit with him in the mornings, he would
continue signing papers. And he developed a
system where he wouldn't sign it, wouldn't sign
anything unless it had initials from whatever
vice president was responsible in that area. He
got where he would not ask any questions if he saw
Tom Cherry's signature or Clyde Freeman or
whoever. But he wouldn't sign it without him. So he
could sign papers and think at the same time. But I
could read his moods very easily. And he was easy to
get along with. Very seldom was he ever short, if he
was really mad about something, he would just
simply turn gray and shut up and not say anything.
Jack Williams was not that way. What were Mr.
Rudder's pet peeves, if he had any?
This sounds silly, but I was close to him, and he
disliked people that smoked pipes. He said,
anybody that has enough time to keep a damn pipe
clean enough to smoke is not doing his job. Another
thing that he was very conservative in terms of the
way people dressed. He thought people should be
dressed properly for their work or their job. He
did not, for example, allow his daughters to wear
shorts at home.
He thought that parents should control most of the
activities of their children who they had dates
with and who they did not have dates with. And he
was, as I mentioned earlier, very close with
money. Ms. Rutter told Peggy and I a number of times
that he damn sure didn't give her enough money to
run that house, that household. And that was true.
But he was just, you know, he came from the land
office and he had an experience of what happens
when people lose respect for money and honesty.
And so he was just going to be very certain that
everything he did was only up and up and expected
the people that worked for him to be the same way. He
reveled in telling stories, certainly about his
experiences in the Army and the Normandy
invasion. And
if he would have a drink or two, he would invariably
start talking about about his experiences in the
military. And I've heard the names, I think at
least once of every Ranger that served under him as
they, and the cooperation they got with the
British, he had a steel trap memory and he could
remember what they ate the night before the
invasion and, uh, which one's got seasick and
things like that. Steel, steel memory, steel trap
memory about things like that. And that war. never
really was over in his mind. And until the day he
died, and this might be edited out, but he still
doesn't trust Germans until the day he died. And he
would try not to say anything, but when somebody
had the name Levi Strom or Schaffner, he was
automatically suspicious because he had such a
bad experience over there with the Germans. He
admired them because they were good, but he
detested them at the same time. I think he would
have felt the same way about the Japanese.
Physically, he was not quite as trim as that statue
is. Physically, okay, a basic point. He had no
interest in this world other than devoting his
life to Texas A&M. In so doing, most of it is
sedentary. What is that the right word?
Sedentary. Sedentary. You can do it sitting down
and very often at banquet tables. He loved to drink
and often it was the wrong kind of thing for a man
that had his feed conversion ratio. He liked
Harvey Wallbangers, for example, which was a
terrible syrupy kind of a drink. That's the last
thing he needed. But he loved to have a few
cocktails before his meals. And that would give
him more of an appetite. And he really had no
exercise. And I think all of that together, the
stress of the job, overweight, and no exercise and
absolutely no outside interest. He tried to go
quail hunting over on the Heap Ranch with me. He'd
walk around for an hour or so and said, when are we
going to eat? He tried to go fishing, but he was the
poorest coordinated man with a rod and reel I've
ever seen. It would wrap around his head and go up
into the trees. And he just couldn't find anything
to get his mind off of his job. And I think with the
combination of stress blood pressure, eating,
and the drinking that creates an appetite that
goes with it. All of those things, I think, killed
him at an early age. And he had no avocation, did he?
No. No hobbies? No. None. Let's see. My brain just
thinks of this. Let's reach back. Did you ever hear
from him any explanation as to how or why Alan
Shivers called on Earl Rudder to come clean up the
land office.
He had been Lyndon Johnson's campaign manager, so
I understand. West Texas, that's right. It had to
be smoky
room politics.
And there's a whole lot of friendship behind the
scenes that went on in and around Austin. that I got
really mainly from Margaret Rutter. But they were
real close to some people high in state politics
through the years. And I don't recall
specifically the Shivers tie-in. I heard a lot
about Jake Pickle and John Connolly and Lyndon
Johnson and all of those. But I don't remember much
about Shivers. Because I think it was Shivers that
brought him over. to head the land office. I
believe it was, yeah. All right, then did you ever
hear how did the A&M leadership come to identify
Earl Rudder to come over here in the late 50s and
take charge? Well, now that was John Connolly,
wasn't it? Well, Connolly wasn't yet governor.
No, wait a minute. Because see, Connolly doesn't
become governor until 62. That's true. And Rutter
came, I think, in 57 and was a vice president.
Right. And as I have understood it, the plan was
clear cut. You come and do this for a year or so, and
then you become president. And his inauguration
is the spring of 1960, because I was in the
procession representing my undergraduate
school, Austin College. And so he officially
becomes president in 59, and the ceremony is held
in early 60. Right. I really can't contribute to
that era. He never really talked about that to me.
So that early age, really nearly everything,
seeing I was in ag extension, and really
everything that I knew about him he either talked
about, and usually with me that was back to the war,
was
me from 63 on. When you got there, describe his
staff, the office group. Dorsey McCrory had been
his assistant. And back to the conservative
nature, Dorsey was a retired colonel in the Army.
I was assured by Clark Monroe that Dorsey would sit
down with me at length and tell me how to be an
assistant to President Errol Rudder. And
Dorsey's total training for me was, oh, you'll
catch on. That was it. He refused to talk about it
anymore. And let's see, the people in the office
then, we didn't have NELDA that early.
He had an executive committee that would meet on
Mondays, and I went to those meetings. And who was
on that? Oh, there'd be... The deans and the vice
presidents? Yeah, that's right, the deans and the
vice presidents, and the directors. Ah, yes.
Because at that time, they reported, the service
directors reported them. And those were really
good meetings, frank and open discussions,
arguments. Fred Benson, of course, was...
leading the pack, he had the most respect, I would
say. He was very wary about things that came from
the system level. Of course, there was bad
feelings there. Can I talk about people? Oh, yes.
Oh, yes, please. He said something like, you know,
I can't stand Clyde Freeman. I don't like him. But
he has never made a mistake. that he's brought to
me. He has been right about everything that's ever
come to me that he's had to interpret for me. J.A.
Amos was the total legislative staff, which would
be Beatle Bailey compared to the entire WW2 now
with what they have. You said legislative. You
meant legal. Excuse me. I meant the total legal
staff with J.A. Amos. And that was down the hall, of
course. But I'm trying to think of Jerry Haught.
Jerry Haught was the main administrative
secretary for him. It was really a very small
staff. Now, you all were in the System building or
the Koch building? Started in System and then went
to Koch. And I'll never forget, I had the air
conditioning was very bad in that building. Well,
the whole building was designed poorly. It was the
worst building I think I've ever been in, except
Guyon Hall. But I said, Mr. Rutter, could I have? I
was on the west side. Would it be OK for me to get some
drapes in here to help cut the sunlight down? All we
had was Venetian blinds. He said, no. He said,
first thing, you know every assistant on campus
would want that. And the rule was there'd be no
carpets and no drapes. And then one August
afternoon, he came into my office. And he says, my
god, Cook River's hot in here. He said, why don't
you get some drapes for those?
That was one of his little quirks. He would come in,
and something that you had mentioned to him before
as an idea, You'd think he had dismissed it. But a
week or so later, he would come back and say, why
don't you look into this? I'll never forget,
Ergolic
in chemistry was the soccer coach for A&M. And he
said, we need a new soccer field. They quit letting
them play on the drill field. And Mr. Rudder said,
Edwin, I want you to find Professor O'Gallick, a
place for the soccer field. And I came down to one
place where the floral test garden is, right in
there. Nice slope, close to the gym, showers,
everything. And I brought a map in, and I showed it
to Mr. O'Gallick. I said, this is the place. This is
it. He said, what is that symbol there, right in the
middle of that field? I said, oh, it's that big,
old, ugly mesquite tree. there's a mesquite tree
in the middle of that field. He said, you find
something else. I said, sir, it's a mesquite. He
said, have you ever been to Eden, Texas? He says,
now that's all we had. He said, I love mesquite
trees. And later, when they were designing the
president's home, he changed the whole driveway
so the big old mesquites that are there to this day
would not be disturbed. But the point back to what I
was saying a while ago about how it would come back
to you, He came in about two weeks later and he says,
have you found a place for the soccer team? I said,
well, sir, the only place really that's within any
kind of reason is the one I showed you. He said,
where the mesquite tree is? I said, yes, sir. He
said, OK, we've got a court trip this coming week.
You tell Shorty Parsons that on Saturday night
after dark that that tree be removed. And Sod put
over it, I don't want anybody to know the tree is
gone. He said, that'll be where our shark will
fill. He said, I'm surprised you didn't come up
with that sooner.
But he had a great feeling for outdoor things. And
on the location of the house, I'll also remember
about the tree. You brought that to mind.
I said one time, why are you facing that house due
east? He said, because the sun is going to shine on
Texas A&M every day, and I want to be the first one to
see it. That's good. Let's go back to that Monday
morning executive committee. He inherited some
of those folks, but he had an influence on some of
the others. One was Frank Hubert. Do you have any
idea of the relation? Did the Huberts and Rudders
have an old Austin relation, or do you know?
Possibly so, through the Texas Education Agency
type of setup. But I've never heard that
specifically discussed. When Hubert said
something, did he listen? Did Rudder listen, like
I know he did when Benson Yes, and Frank, I think he
did because he had the same habit that he had on
academic council. Not academic council. APC.
APC. Which I admired. He would listen to all the
arguments and not say a word until he had it in his
mind that the best route would be, and then he would
speak up at the end. And I think Mr. Rudder...
appreciated that. Uh, Benson, you didn't have to
say anything. You read him, read his face. Uh, I
remember one of the things that he challenged the
deans with. He says, Now we committed after the
report that you were involved in, we're committed
to excellence. We're not gonna have that unless we
have some really world-renowned type of faculty
and administrators here and he really pressed
them to to find people and I remember Romanek was
one of the really early ones and turned out to be an
interesting choice but he was one and then later
the man that was the National Academy of Science I
can't remember his name precisely then Horace
Byers but all of this started with Rudder's
admonition I want some bell ringers in here we've
got to have them. And if we get those, we can get the
money that we need for research that you guys keep
pounding about. And another thing that he was
adamant about is never losing track of how
important undergraduate teaching was. I think
one of his peeves was that faculty people, and
deans included, probably were putting too much
stress on the research aspect over the classroom
teaching. I don't think he was not opposed to
research, but he was opposed to people losing
track of how important it was that we have fine
classroom teaching at the undergraduate level.
That was a pet peeve of his. He
did not like social climbers. We're back to his
personality traits now. But you could see that at
the dean's meetings and everywhere we would meet
and talk. He was more interested in seeing a
person's results than he was idle chatter about
it. He laid great strength in knowing people, and I
think the thing that I remember the best about him
was he said, Edwin, you're going to have in your
future life people that you work with or that work
for you, and they're going to be disappointing to
you, and they're going to screw up some things or
cause problems. He said, I think the best thing to
do whether it's education, business, or
elsewhere. When you get somebody new in there,
maybe somebody you didn't even hire, but you have
to work with them, find out what they do well. And
don't expect them to do anything besides that.
Find out what they don't do well. Forget it. You're
not going to change them. Find out what they do well
and take advantage of that. And you'll be happy,
and they'll be happy. And he kept saying that more
than any other thing that I remember. Now, his
chief financial officer when you got there was Tom
Cherry? Right. And Clark Diebel. And what was
their relationship? It was excellent, if you're
asking for it. Tom was completely honest with him.
He was not afraid to buck an idea. And he would argue
points. And he'd had such good experience with
the, what was it? He was with an airlines. Yeah, Pan
American Airlines or something. He'd had a rich
experience. And Mr. Rudder had the greatest
confidence in him. And then Tom leaned very
heavily on Clark Diebel. as the one to get the
nitty-gritty work of the day done. And Tom was
freed up to do a lot of thought about directions
that we were moving fiscally and so forth. And Mr.
Rutter had a high opinion of him. And he simply
would not sign anything unless Tom Cherry's TDC
was on there.
Looking now for anecdotes. Can you recall any
interesting situation where something fiscally
went wrong or was about to go wrong and maybe
somebody grabbed it, found it, discovered it?
Let me think about that. As we go on, I'll think of
one. Because there have to be where somebody comes
in and, uh-oh, so-and-so is broke or, We're about
to go over the budget, or we just found a
mathematical error, and we got a million dollars
more than we thought we had. There's got to be. OK,
I'll think of something on that line. He and Diebel
went back to the land office, and so they. That's
the German that he trusted. OK, then in the student
area, Hannigan was here as dean of students.
Another retired general. Another retired
general. who, to me, didn't always understand
Texas A&M well. Did Mr. Rutter think that of
Hannigan? I think Mr. Rutter
knew that Hannigan was going to, in his own way,
make conservative decisions, that he was not
going to come up with some wild-eyed program that
was going to cost a great deal of money. And the guys
that worked for him were grossly underpaid. I
found that out later. And the dean of students' job
in Mr. Rudder's eyes was maintain law and order and
good study conditions, break up water fights, cut
out pornography, cut out the drinking in the
dormitories, and make everybody pretty well toe
the line, as if it were a military encampment. He
never really was. sold, in my mind, on a lot of the
really good extracurricular things that were
taking place, like at the MSC Council. He never was
really strong on that. Of course, the core was his
love, but like the student leadership
conferences.